@c $Id: tips.texi,v 4.1 2000/12/11 09:54:19 cibrario Rel $

@node Tips Tricks and Known Bugs, GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, The sutil Library, Top
@chapter Tips, Tricks, and Known Bugs
@cindex Tips
@cindex Tricks
@cindex Known Bugs

As every other piece of software I know of, @code{saturn} is not
bug-free.  This chapter lists known bugs and gives some tips and tricks
that, I hope, will be useful to circumvent the most common problems.

@itemize @bullet
@item
ROM views are not reset when @code{-reset} is given on the command line;
as a result, @code{-reset} could be unable to recover from all possible
calculator hangup conditions.  This bug affects the HP49 / HP40 models
only.  As a workaround, remove the @code{cpu} and @code{mod} state files
and restart the emulator, with @code{-reset}.

@item
The peripheral module initialization sequence can generate an interrupt
request to the CPU emulator; this can give a segmentation fault if the
CPU state loaded from file was corrupt. This situation cannot be
recovered with @code{-reset}, because the CPU reset is executed much
later in the emulator's init sequence.  This bug bites only if something
terrible happened to your CPU state file, or if you attempted to load a
state file saved on a different host architecture; in this case, remove
the @code{cpu} state file and restart the emulator, with @code{-reset}.

@item
The serial port emulation no longer works when the machine state
is saved and then restored while the serial port was @strong{on};
the port is automagically turned @strong{off} when the state is restored,
but nobody cares to notify the calculator's firmware about this.

@item
Some X keysyms, for example @code{Return} and @code{Tab}, don't work
correctly in keyboard shortcuts, because Motif insists on grabbing
them for its own use.

@item
The emulation of the LCD display is poor; in particular, neither
gray-scale nor hardware-assisted scrolling are supported.
As a result, most action games will not work on @code{saturn}.

@item
The emulation of the Flash ROM is limited to the bare minimum
needed to run the HP49 firmware.

@item
The infrared port is not emulated at all.

@item
There is no support to revector the calculator's serial port
to a real serial port on the host machine.  Only pseudo-terminals
are supported.

@end itemize
