@c $Id: prep.texi,v 4.1 2000/12/11 09:54:19 cibrario Rel $

@node Preparing saturn for Use, Using the Emulator, Introduction and License Conditions, Top
@chapter Preparing saturn for Use
@cindex Preparing saturn for Use

If you are in a real hurry and you only want to emulate an HP49 as soon
as possible, you can run the @code{./quick_start} shell script;
hopefully, it will guide you through a simplified setup process.
Otherwise, read the detailed explanation below.

To run @code{saturn} successfully, you need a suitable ROM image for
each calculator model you want to emulate.  ROM images are copyrighted
by Hewlett-Packard and cannot be freely redistributed, therefore they
are not distributed with the emulator itself.

During startup, the @code{saturn} software reads a ``packed'' ROM image
file from mass storage, according to the @code{-stateDir} and
@code{-rom} command-line options, if any.  In order to be able to use it
directly, the ROM image file must hold two nibbles per byte, and the
nibble at lower address must be stored in the least significative four
bits of each byte.

To obtain a ROM image, you can either dump your calculator's ROM using
any ROM-dump utility you have available or, for the HP49 only, download
it from the Hewlett-Packard web site.  In any case, be sure you don't
infringe any copyright in the process and that the ROM image file you
have actually has the format described above.

To make this task easier, the @code{saturn} software provides a small
utility, the @code{pack} program; it converts a popular emu48/49 ROM
image into a format suitable for use with @code{saturn}.  Invoke it as
follows:

@example
$ ./pack @var{emu48_ROM_image} @var{saturn_ROM_image}
@end example

In this example, @var{emu48_ROM_image} is the name of the emu48/49 ROM
image file, and @var{saturn_ROM_image} is the name of the destination
file that @code{pack} creates and that will contain the @code{saturn}
ROM image.  After running @code{pack} successfully once, you can of
course delete the original ROM image.

When you have all ROM images you need, place each of them into its own,
empty directory; create one directory for each calculator model you want
to emulate. @code{saturn} will use these directories to hold the saved
state of each calculator model, according to the @code{-stateDir}
command-line option.

You can emulate multiple instances of the same calculator model,
possibly using different ROM revisions for them, too: simply create one
state directory for each instance, and place the appropriate ROM image
into them.

For example, suppose you want to emulate an HP49 and you have an
emu48/49 ROM image available in @var{rom_1.19_4.e48}; to prepare a state
directory named @var{~/saturn_state} for use, enter the following commands:

@example
$ mkdir @var{~/saturn_state}
$ pack @var{rom_1.19_4.e48} @var{~/saturn_state}/rom
@end example

This example assumes that the @code{pack} executable
is in your search path, @var{rom_1.19_4.e48} resides in your
current working directory, and your shell expands the
@code{~} character to the invoker's home directory.

To run @code{saturn}, instructing it to emulate an HP49 and
to use the state directory you just created, enter one of
the following commands:

@example
$ ./run_saturn -stateDir @var{~/saturn_state} -face hp49 -hw hp49
@end example

or

@example
$ saturn -stateDir @var{~/saturn_state} -face hp49 -hw hp49
@end example

You should use the former command from your build directory if you
didn't install the @code{saturn} software systemwide, or if you have
a user-level, binary-only package; instead, use the latter one if you
built @code{saturn} yourself and then installed it, or
if you installed a systemwide, binary-only package.

Also, the latter command assumes that the target installation
directory of @code{saturn} (usually @code{/usr/bin/X11}) is in your
search path.

To emulate an HP40, follow the same steps outlined above, using
an HP40 ROM image of course, and then run @code{saturn} with either:

@example
$ ./run_saturn -stateDir @var{~/saturn_state} -face hp40 -hw hp49
@end example

or

@example
$ saturn -stateDir @var{~/saturn_state} -face hp40 -hw hp49
@end example

To emulate an HP48GX, you have an additional task: create the
initial, empty images of port1 and port2 storage areas. To
do this, enter the following commands:

@example
$ dd if=/dev/zero of=@var{~/saturn_state}/port1 bs=1k count=128
$ dd if=/dev/zero of=@var{~/saturn_state}/port2 bs=1k count=1024
@end example

This example assumes that you have not modified the
@code{N_PORT_2_BANK_48} configuration option.

Then, you can invoke @code{saturn} with either:

@example
$ ./run_saturn -stateDir @var{~/saturn_state}
@end example

or

@example
$ saturn -stateDir @var{~/saturn_state}
@end example

In all examples above, you may want to specify additional command-line options
for @code{saturn}; for additional information, see @ref{Command Line Options}.
