@c $Id: sutil.texi,v 4.1 2000/12/11 09:54:19 cibrario Rel $

@node The sutil Library, Tips Tricks and Known Bugs, Customizing saturn, Top
@chapter The sutil Library
@cindex The sutil Library

The @code{sutil} library is currently available for the HP48 and HP49
calculators only, and provides the following commands:

@table @code
@item kget ( '@var{file_name}' -> )
This command retrieves the file @var{file_name} from mass storage and
stores it into a calculator's variable with the same name.  In response
to this command the emulator pops up a file selection box, allowing you
to accept the transfer, possibly altering the source file name/location
proposed by the calculator, or to cancel the transfer.
@item send ( '@var{var_name}' -> )
This command saves the calculator's variable @var{var_name} into mass
storage.  In response to this command the emulator pops up a file
selection box, allowing you to accept the transfer, possibly altering
the target file name/location proposed by the calulator, or to cancel the
transfer.
@item speed ( @var{speed_sel} -> )
This command allows you to set the speed of the emulated calculator:
@var{speed_sel} must be a real number denoting the desired speed
in MHz; the special value @code{0} indicates that the calculator must
be run to the maximum possible speed.  The speed change takes
effect immediately.
@end table

Of course, these commands work on the @code{saturn} emulator @strong{only},
and could crash when invoked on another emulator or on the
real calculator.

You can load the @code{sutil} library into your emulated HP48 by
following these steps:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Transfer the file @code{sutil_48.lib} into your emulated calculator,
using either xmodem or kermit.
@item
Bring the library on stack level 1 and store it into a port of your choice.
@item
Warmstart the emulated calculator; the @code{sutil} library should
now be in your library catalog.
@end itemize

To rebuild the library object on your HP48 calculator, the following
steps are required:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Ensure that both the MetaKernel version 2.30 and the SysRPL entry point
table are loaded on the calculator, and that the @code{STARTEXT}
reserved variable points to the entry point table.
@item
Transfer the source directory @code{sutil_48.dir} into the calculator;
ensure that the transfer is done in ASCII mode.
@item
Enter the source directory and run the @code{MAKE} word; the
@code{sutil} library should now be on stack level 1.
@end itemize

You can load the @code{sutil} library into your emulated HP49 by
following these steps:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Transfer the file @code{sutil_49.lib} into your emulated calculator,
using either xmodem or kermit.
@item
Bring the library on stack level 1 and store it into a port of your choice.
@item
Warmstart the emulated calculator; the @code{sutil} library should
now be in your library catalog.
@end itemize

To rebuild the library object on your HP49 calculator, the following
steps are required:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Ensure that library 256 is attached and that library 258 (extable)
is loaded on the calculator.
@item
Transfer the source directory @code{sutil_49.dir} into the calculator;
ensure that the transfer is done in ASCII mode.
@item
Enter the source directory and run the @code{MAKE} word; the
@code{sutil} library should now be on stack level 1.
@end itemize
